Breaking Down the Influences of These 100 AI Leaders
This is from the Times Piece: https://time.com/collection/time100-ai/

Extracting Insights into the state of AI from the public positions of these Luminaries

---

- LEADERS -

1&2) Dario and Daniela Amodei
CEO & President, Anthropic

Brother-Sister duo at the head of Anthropic - worlds leading AI lab. Claims safer and more responsible approach to AI alignment. **Mechanistic Interpretability** - something analogous to brain scan of AI. **Constitutional AI** and **RLHF** (Reinforcment Learning with Human Feedback)

$1.6 Billion Dollars Raised - $500 Million form FTX, Money from Salesforce, Marc Benioff (CEO of Times)

Analysis
I get the feeling that this is Scholastic Old Money (like FTX) that is funding this project. I have no evidence/or I need to look into it but I feel that "old money", maybe American Elites, concentrated here. These two are the champion for this technology.

3) Sam Altman
Former President of Y Combinator
Optimism in Humanities adaptability to increasingly powerful AI. Gradual introduction of AI into society.
Policy Oriented - Lawmakers & Governence
AI tools in the pursuit of productive labor, education, and fun
**Low paid workers - RLHF**
**Superalignment** - dedicate 20% budget
The goal is the **Educate** people about the technology
Leave the decisions to institution and civil society

Analysis
Real educators. People who truly want people to learn and understand what is going on. As educators, I feel that OpenAI probably defers executative decisions to the "institutions" and "civil society" - after of course edcuation them with all the knoweldge. I'm not as cyncial towards OpenAI as many others seem to be regarding Regalatory Capture and Cynical business practices.

4) Demis Hassabis
Google DeepMind - organized information, god-eye view
building powerful artificial intelligence
**multimodel** Gemini
Path towards AGI - scientific advancement, shape world for better (AI powered products)
**unitary piece of information** - Facts/Models of the Real World
Sparrow (**Safer Dialogue Agent**) - Preferred Response/Adversial Probing [https://www.deepmind.com/blog/building-safer-dialogue-agents]
**Evaluation Benchmarks**
**The Frontier Model Forum** - [https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2023/07/26/anthropic-google-microsoft-openai-launch-frontier-model-forum/] 

Analysis
I personally think that setting Evaluation Benchmarks is the way to go if at all possible, as other researchers are willing to replicate and meet benchmarks. The way to do so, from my intutition is to write a paper or design a class that easily onboards people into the research. They will carry the benchmark fowards as they are taught with it in mind.

I'm personally skeptical of AI researchers wanting to play governing boards with the "Frontier Model Forum" but I can see it as something potentially being super important as AI actually becomes powerful on the world stage

5) Robin Li
CEO, chairman, co-founder of Baidu (Chinese Search Engine, It's pretty good, somewhat better educationally than Google (sadly corrupted by advertising))
Chinese Foremost Futurist
**AI Logical Reasoning** - claims of AI can do lot more now than before
**Chinese government’s National Artificial Intelligence Standardization Group’s LLM task force**
Build > Regulate
Offer Public Services (AI enabled)
**Human-Computer Interaction** - AI as a paradigm shift
**AI Native Apps** - AI Boom
**Chinese Domestic Chips** - oppurtunity for Baidu

*Anaylsis
I'm personally pulling for bettering US-China relations. Being Ethnic Chinese myself there must be business oppurtunties if I look to leverage the manufactoring capabilites of China and their chips to effectively outcompete these anti-chinese companies - they're either virutue signaling American pride (which I personally have some) or they actually believe they can get cheaper chips elsewhere (in which case they're dumb)

6) Clément Delangue
CEO, CoFounder of HuggingFace - an open-source, for-profit machine-learning platform where researchers from around the world convene to share their AI models, datasets, and best practices
I honestly shouldn't bring this memetic up but I first thought that Hugging Face was Face Huggers (from the Alien movies, the cute emoji makes me even more suspicious)

**Open Source Repository** - potential abuse by anon, collaborative approach, counterbalance to cosolidation, provide transparency

Anaylsis
It's a very good repo - it certially saves people the time and effort need to maintain their own repos
I've personally benefited from the ethos of open-source, "collaboration" rather than "intellectual theft" as it ultimately enables the "builders" above all others (the code is there do with it what you will)
I believe the claim that being in the open makes AI more understandable and thereby better decisions can be made

7) Lila Ibrahim
COO, Google DeepMind (startup, academic lab, and global tech behemoth)
Background - Intel, VC firm Kleiner Perkins, and ed-tech startup Coursera
day-to-day operations
**Gopher** Dec 2020, Google Project (like ChatGPT) unreleased because of concerns over its tendency to give factually incorrect responses
**Safe AI** - equate AI to the level of pandemic & nuclear war
**Concern Over Progeny** - Tucking in two daughters safe at night

Analysis
Future oriented safety concerns
Children focus
A very shallow look would be to say that this is general maternal instincts at play here. In fairness, that concern is vital, otherwise people will do stupid and dangerous things.

8) Elon Musk
Founder, xAI
Richest Man in the World
Fear of AI
Calls OpenAI, "profit-maximizing demon from hell"
**TruthGPT** - understand the true nature of the universe
Tesla, Neurolink, & Optimus
Calls for Pause in AI development

Analysis
The times article highlights motivation by fear...
AI has the potential for civilization destruction
This begs the question is "Truth" the antidote to [the dangers of AI]

9) Raquel Urtasun
CEO and Founder, Waabi
Waabi is an autonomous trucking startup (2021)
long-haul trucking, robotic trucks
**Second Mover Advantage**
**AI Generated Simulatons**
**Grit** - I'll show you attitute

Analysis
Autonomous Trucking seems like one of the more useful applications of AI. I like the 2nd mover advantage... one can look and see where others have failed... one can use where others have succeeded. Simulations, which I personally associate with video games, seems like a big player in AI. Having grit and the determination to persue something when others don't seems like a good indicator of success.
Personal rant about AI automous vehicles. I often wonder if the US decided to persue the wrong tech tree. I think rail systems are honestly worth looking at. Why does the US insist on personal vehicles and planes. Would it not be better and simpler for a really good rail system for everything...

10) Alex Karp
Co-Founder (with Peter Thiel) and CEO, Palantir Technologies
US Goverment Agencies, secretive and controveral contracts
Palantir - one of several indestructible crystal balls from The Lord of the Rings. The word comes from Quenya palan 'far', and tir 'watch over'.
**Military AI** - AI when used on the battlefield, Geo Political Concerns
Privacy Violations
Government Misuse

Analysis
This is the US version of (the much critized CCP) Goverment Serveilance, or I think it's that. He seems very concerned with geopolitics and the balance of power from that perspective.
I hear they have really good data visualization tools.
With military budgets being so high, it probably likely that some useful consumer products will come from it, I'm of course thinking about ARPANET being the predesesor to the Internet. There is probably some military AI system right now that's out of the eyes of regular people that will be useful in the future as a consumer product.

11) Reid Hoffman
Entrepreneur and Investor, VC firm (Greylock Partners)
Apple, Paypal, LinkedIn, Facebook
OpenAI investor
Inflection AI
Impromptu - book, **Blitzscaling** - business book, 
Accelerationist Approach
Dealing with AI Hallucintions - Microsoft/Google - work to reduce to human-expert rate
Building Values into the Technologies that one's Building
Human Transition in the age of AI - advised Kamala Harris
Stability AI’s Emad Mostaque - Biggest Bubble - AI - People will invest intot really foolish things

Analysis
Sounds like a person who is really tapped in the technological revolution that has happend in the world. I'm probably one of the people who is living in the type of world that he has built (he has invested in internet, mobile, cloud), as a person who has had a short career in tech these are technically the things I've been working on, or peripherally working on. I need to look into this idea of Blitzscaling - it seems to be the winning strategy for a company to achieve some global recognition.

12) Greg Brockman
co-founder and president of OpenAI
10x Engineer, Worked at Stripe
60 - 100 hours working/week, 80% coding... 20% spent on thinking about big questions facing OpenAI
2021 disagreement lead to Anthropic
**Iterative Deployment** - criticized for safty concerns

Analysis
I agree on the iterative approach.
I guess in a sense the only way to ensure that AI rollout into society is safe is with gradual deployments. Using that feedback one can control for outcome. If AGI was suddenly release without all the testing and feedback, it could lead to uncontrollable consequences...

13) Marc Andreessen
Entrepreneur and Investor
"AI will make everything we care about better"
He's touting AI as he is heavily invested in them... obviously
OpenAI and Character.AI
Against regulation that might contrict fledging AI startups
He was wrong about the cypto bubble
He has a **Tech-Forward Vision**

Analysis
From what I know Marc has a big outsized influcence on the type of media I consume - effective/accerationism
I personally like that he had a fund that helps video game developers
I suppose I'm in the camp of trying a technocratic rule

14) Sandra Rivera
General Manager of Data Center and AI Group, Intel
23 Year career at Intel
AI Accelerator Chips - Gaudi AI
Intel "missteps" - why they are not as competitive
Interested in the Chinese Market
**Difference Perspective and Experience** - Daughter of Columbian Immigrants who grew up in New Jersey 

Analysis
This piece looks to be more about Intel than about Sandra. As someone who has 23 years of experience at a place, she would seem to be a mouthpiece of the organization. I'm encouraged by the affirmation of her Columbian heritage and how this differentiator is important in decision making rooms (though I would be somewhat skeptical just how different it would be beside the cultural stuff) Obviously, I don't know her and I don't fully trust Times reporting but, but it's something interesting to think about. I can personally think of unique ways to leverage one's unqiue background to provide an unique perspective.

15) Aidan Gomez
CEO and Co-Founder, Cohere

Cohere is an enterprise-focused company that helps businesses implement AI into their chatbots, search engines, and other product offerings.
27 Year Old
Funding 270 million from Nvidia, Index Ventures, (Salesforce)
Backed by AI luminaries like Geoffrey Hinton
co-authored the paper "Attention Is All You Need"
Close to Metal - Need for Translation
Enterprise as best way to close the gap between theory and real world
Killer App for AI
Integrate AI into every online interaction
**Human Computer Interaction** - natural interface for intellectual exchange
Dissmisses AI doomerism - AI as threat to human existence "absurd"

Analysis
It's interesting to me that for a 27 year old, there's a lot emphsis on who he's being funded my and who he is backed by. I guess for a institutional publication like the Times, it's rather important for proven people to back upstarts... Interesting thing to note...
I like the approach of Enterprise Solution
Look to create the next great app - Human Computer Interaction (AI Powered)

16) Daniel Gross
Entrepreneur and Investor

Daniel Gross, 32, with fellow investor Nat Friedman
Search Engine Greplin (Cue) sold 40-60 million to Apple
AI vertical at Y Combinator

**Securing Compute**
Andromeda is a supercomputer made up of cutting-edge chips (wired together "compute cluster")that weigh 7,255 lb. and cost around $100 million, including electricity and cooling costs.

Provide startups access to Andromeda's computing power in exchange for equity in the startups.

Andromeda provides startups with a "white hot oven" to quickly train and refine their AI models before bringing them to market.

**Investor Question** Where is the smart money in AI now?
**Next Big Thing** (Creative Thinking - iPhone -> Instacart/Uber)

Analysis
I guess the guy is focused on what's going to be used.
The ability to distil what the most (money critical)/important part of new technolgy. Jumping on that and making money. Understanding that the shovel seller makes money during the gold rush.
Imaginative thinking in understanding what will be very useful to the average consumer further down the road.

17) Kai-Fu Lee
Chairman and CEO, Sinovation Ventures
Taipei native, Four Decades of Computer Engineering, Doctoral dissertation 1988 - large-vocabulary speech-recognition model, Top executive for Apple & Microsoft - head of Google in China
Sinovation Ventures, a Beijing-based venture-capital firm that manages $3 billion in Chinese high-tech assets
**Human Level Cognitive Tests**
  - “by some measures, we’ve already achieved it”
  - “by other measures, it’s within grasp”

New language startup, 01.AI - LLM technology “is a historic opportunity that China cannot miss.”

futurist
cancer survivor

**Social Responsibility** 
written prolifically about job displacement
various social upheavals that the AI revolution is already bringing. 
protect people without stymieing enormous benefits AI can bring

**AI Dangers**
harming others
creating weapons
misinformation
manipulating people for profit
evil intent

Analysis
A big focus on the Social Responsibility, with the belief that AI is already as performant on cognitive tasks as people. I'm in a similiar camp in that I believe that the current AI are already above people, it's certainly above me in many core metrics, in fact my entire high-school training, which I personally think is the most formative years for me (as a prep kid), has basically all been outdone by LLMs.
I guess there's some responsibility on part of practitioner to ease society as a whole into this new paradigm. Obviously, one needs to avoid the temptation of all the AI Dangers, as they are real temptations. I guess there is a real chance of someone to try it, even in a why the fuck not try it sort of attitute that needs looking into.

18) Jaime Teevan
Chief Scientist, Microsoft
2018 first-ever chief scientist at Microsoft
Research backed innovation, focused on making AI research central to Microsoft

Microsoft has been preparing for this inflection point in AI innovation for many years.

Global Pandemic - influenced remote and hybrid work
rethink of the ways many workers meet, communicate, and collaborate
but also generated a wealth of fresh data that could be used to help inform Microsoft’s approach to using AI in its products.
The pandemic helped influence their thinking about “how AI can change communication and collaboration and help us work together better and understand information better”

Around a year ago she was tasked with integrating GPT-4, the advanced large language model created by Microsoft-backed OpenAI, into Microsoft’s core products.

Teevan’s team threw itself into efforts like Copilot, an AI-based tool that works across the Microsoft 365 suite of software that includes Word, Excel, and Outlook, to do tasks such as summarizing meetings, drafting emails, and analyzing data.



For all the talk about potential uses of AI in the distant future

Teevan is focused on how it can make our lives easier now

“We’re all inventing something new in the context of AI,”

“And doing that well really requires business leaders to lead like scientists.”

Microsoft - future of work
Always going to be the backbone partner/tech solution for white-collar jobs
AI will gathering knowledge at a much faster pace

“I think we’re going to see a fundamental shift in what knowledge is, how knowledge is captured, and how people produce knowledge—and start getting very intentional about how people produce knowledge,” 

What makes a conversation useful?

What helps your reflection on the conversation afterward?


Analysis
I personally will feel that I've my Psyoped by Microsoft to provide them with the data during the Work From Home years of the Pandemic. As a forerunner of integrating OpenAI code into actual production software (probably when I wasn't suppose to), I feel like I personally did the tech world a favor. Now, if I stop being schizo about this stuff, I think Microsoft is a great company.
Microsoft is a great platform that I've personally grew up with.
I was working with Azure as my last official professional capacity.
As a (serverless) pratitioner, Azure compute along with the other clouds is vital to what I do... With me focusing on input->output, I should be always searching for good hardware
Issues with owning one's own hardware
Many companies are built on top of existing infra

19) Andrew Ng
Founder, DeepLearning.AI
2010 - proposal for neural networks -> AGI where AI systems could match or outperform humans at any cognitive tasks

“I was actually quite bullish about AGI, even back then,” Ng says.

**Need Additional Technical Breakthroughs** - To Achieve AGI
Unlike other researchers (Geoffrey Hinton and Yoshua Bengio), Professor Ng remains unconvinced of the negative aspects surrounding the dangers and risks that AI could bring

Founded Google Brain - most innovative and influential teams in the development of AI over the past decade.

In 2014, he joined the Chinese tech giant Baidu, where he spent three years as chief scientist, leading the company’s 1,300-person AI Group.

Laid the foundation for the AI boom.
Hasten the arrival of the benefits of AI
Educating as many people as possible in the field of AI, through projects such as Coursera and DeepLearning.AI.

8 million people have taken an AI class from Ng (I have as well - didn't finish it sadly)

Empower people around the world to use these tools, and build AI applications.

Builds and Funds projects that build AI applications
Managing Partner at AI Fund, and AI-focused venture-capital fund.
How do we put the personalized tutor in every child's pockets?
How do we help everyone get customized medical services?
How do we make sure that every person has good legal advice?

Analysis
Andrew Ng is a great educator...
It looks like he's behind the movement of simulating human brains in silicon. I see no reason that human cognitive function need a specific substrate. There's a good discussion to be had about just abstracting away human cognitive function away from other other more "philisophical/spiritual" aspects of human cognition. I certinally think that it sould be the case for a good engineer to automate his job away with the AI techniques

20) Kevin Scott
CTO and Executive Vice President of AI, Microsoft
$1 billion investment in OpenAI in 2019, Microsoft injected an additional $10 billion into OpenAI this year.
Sam Altman credited Scott with being “most of the reason why we’ve wanted to partner with Microsoft from the very beginning”

Quest for AI supremacy - "A race starts today"
Bing search engine driven by AI.

Interesting story about New York Times columnist Kevin Roose - Bing's chatbot demanding Roose leave his wife for it

AI priorities - development of "copilots" or AI assistants for virtually any task.

The programming assistant GitHub Copilot, for example, is already helping more than 1 million developers code.

**Copilots**
  - Windows Terminal
  - Clippy (Word-like software)
  - Airline-Ticket Purchase
  - Drug Discover
  - etc.

Analysis
Understanding that Business to Business interaction and cooperation/partnerships. Copilot technology is the future, until we finally allow them to be main pilot. Microsoft suite is still really good software for production. A bit stuffy as always... why can't we have AI waifus...

21) Jensen Huang
CEO, President and Co-Founder, Nvidia
Focused on "Visuals" (Graphics)
Nvidia founded 1993, graphics cards for increasingly fantastical and immersive video games.
is the world’s dominant producer of the microprocessors that power the AI revolution, late August’s $1.1 trillion valuation.

Demand for Nvidia’s chips has soared with the explosion of large language models such as ChatGPT, with the firm’s latest GH200 processor, unveiled Aug. 4, significantly slashing algorithm-training time.

“We have reached the tipping point of a new computing era,” Huang told the Computex conference in Taipei in May.

“Everyone is a programmer now. You just have to say something to the computer.”

Huang, 60, was born in the southern Taiwanese city of Tainan and spent a chunk of his childhood in Thailand, where he has confessed to being “a very good student” though “very mischievous.”

His family eventually settled in the U.S., first in rural Kentucky and then outside of Portland, Ore. After earning his masters from Stanford in 1992, Huang worked as a microprocessor designer at Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) before founding Nvidia over breakfast with two friends at a Denny’s in San Jose, Calif.

The trio might have choked on their Grand Slams had they been told back then that their fledgling enterprise would one day be thrust into a geopolitical tussle.

U.S.-export controls introduced by the Biden Administration last October have blocked Nvidia from selling its most advanced chips to Chinese customers, prompting Huang to complain to the Financial Times of “enormous damage to American companies” if they’re unable to trade with the world’s No. 2 economy.

“If they’re not thoughtful on regulations, they will hurt the tech industry.” It’s left Nvidia with exactly what Huang has long railed against: a lack of clarity.

Analysis
It's hard to believe that people used to not take Nvidia seriously when compared to Intel and IBM.
I think there's something to the fact that many young men are familair with Nvidia that makes it such high evalutation. People who only have a shallow understanding of the AI revolution see Nvidia as their entryway. Of course Nvidia also happens to have the best drivers - honestly the best programmers in the world have all been working in the video game sphere if you think about it.

22) Clara Shih
CEO, Salesforce AI
Salesforce - cloud computing giant
Generative AI - revolutionary?
help companies use new AI technology, minimize risk of doing so
Salesforce - enables other companies
  - 150,000 corporate customers
  - storing customer data on cloud not company-owned hardware
  - Salesforce convinved companies to do it
Do with AI what it did for cloud

People understand the tremendous upside
How do I use generative AI safely?
Risk - AI makes things up

Shih’s second stint at Salesforce.
2006 building app platform
2009 started her own business - Hearsay Systems, which helps financial-services and insurance companies use social media in a compliant way

Now Hearsay’s chair, Shih said her experience as a business owner has helped inform her understanding of what clients need since her return to Salesforce in 2020.

The company has developed AI products that, for instance, automatically mask sensitive information in users’ prompts, and prevent prompts from being retained to train AI models later. These safeguards are built into products that can automatically draft sales emails, and another that can generate summaries of customer interactions.

While Salesforce is developing its own models, it’s also partnering with existing companies, including OpenAI, and investing in a slew of AI startups, from Anthropic to Hugging Face. Building up the AI ecosystem will benefit Salesforce customers, Shih says. “There’s space in the market for multiple models, and there’s going to be different models that are right for different tasks at different price points,” she says.

Shih remains “cautiously optimistic” about the impact all of this technology will have on jobs. 

She views AI not as a replacement for workers, but as a way to take some of the load off.

“There’s no business or team where people feel like they don’t have enough to do,”

**No Shortage of Undone Tasks**

Analysis
Representative for Salesforce...
They have some periphery access to the customers of 150000 corporations...
Big service, in knowing what people are actually spending money on
AI as a way of taking the load off workers
No shortage of undone tasks...

23) Alexandr Wang
CEO and Founder, Scale AI

World’s youngest self-made billionaire at 24
after dropping out of MIT five years earlier to co-found Scale AI in 2016. 

Scale, which helps companies improve the data they use to train their machine-learning algorithms, uses both software and human workers to label, or tag, the vast troves of text, image, and video data. The San Francisco–based company has become a $7 billion behemoth, with a client roster that includes the giants of the field, including Meta, Microsoft, and OpenAI. “We’ve been quietly powering the entire AI industry for many, many years now,” says Wang, 26.

But what increasingly sets Scale apart is its CEO’s message that America’s national security is tied to its ability to become the dominant player in AI. After a trip to China in 2018, Wang became outspoken about the threat posed by China’s AI ambitions, and cultivated ties with U.S. officials who shared his sense of urgency. “It dawned on me that this technology had become really, really critical for how the future of our world is going to play out,” he says. “I think it’s really important that not just ourselves, but as many AI companies as possible, are working to help bridge the gap.”

Wang’s upbringing, as the son of Chinese immigrants who worked as physicists at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, where nuclear weapons were first developed, instilled in him a conviction that “breakthrough technologies are actually a really critical part of national security,” he says. “I was pretty aware of how important it was to have these technologies to be able to deter your adversaries.”

Wang’s view that the AI race is a battle between “democratic values” and authoritarianism has resonated in Washington, where officials are studying how AI could reshape warfare and alter the global balance of power. Wang has briefed lawmakers behind closed doors, appeared at hearings on Capitol Hill, and secured lucrative contracts with the Defense Department. Scale now lists the U.S. Army, the U.S. Air Force, and the Pentagon’s Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Office among its clients.

But Scale’s values have also come under scrutiny.
The company has increasingly drawn criticism for relying on cheap labor abroad, outsourcing its data-labeling work to more than 200,000 people in countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, where it reportedly pays some workers less than $1 an hour.
Labor-rights groups have assailed the company for operating “digital sweatshops.”
A Scale spokesperson tells TIME that their economists conduct quarterly pay analyses “to ensure fair and competitive compensation.”

Analysis
Democratic Values vs Authoritarianism
Defense Department contracts

I've always wondered if AI is acutally just an elaborate way of shifting work to less privaged areas. It's in a way outsourcing with multiple steps. Data-labeling and the percieved magic of many LLM machines are the combined efforts of these 200,000 underpaid people...
There is definately oppurtunty in making money from cheap worldwide labor...
In fact, this is probably the defintive way to make money
Find a way to arbitrage labor prices
Digital methods - seems to be the easiest

24) Mustafa Suleyman
CEO and Co-Founder, Inflection AI

Grew up in the UK where he was teenage friends with Demis Hassabis
Long term thinkers - 20years down the road

Titans in the AI industry
In 2010, the pair co-founded the AI lab DeepMind together alongside Shane Legg, and the company rose to the top of the industry thanks to their development of AlphaGo, an AI that beat human champions of the board game Go.

While Hassabis still runs DeepMind, Suleyman, 39, has since struck out on his own.
DeepMind was acquired by Google in 2014, and Suleyman pivoted to work for Google itself in 2019, before departing to join the VC firm Greylock Partners in 2022.
Also last year, he and Greylock’s Reid Hoffman co-founded Inflection, an AI chatbot startup.
Suleyman has also positioned himself as a thought leader who is cognizant of AI’s benefits and risks.
His book The Coming Wave, released Sept. 5, warns of a “radical transformation” across industries and even nation-states.

Suleyman believes that before AI research labs go too far down the road toward artificial general intelligence (AGI)—meaning systems that can think and learn more efficiently than humans—AI development will need to take some kind of pause.
But we’re not there yet, Suleyman says, adding that he hopes before then, we’ll reach what he terms ACI, or artificial capable intelligence: AIs that are smart enough to fulfill all human needs, serving as our personal assistants, medical advisers, and chiefs of staff.
“It’s gonna make us all massively wealthier, healthier, and more productive,” he tells TIME.

Suleyman is well aware that AIs are shaped by the people who build them—from their values to the experiences they’ve lived through. His own values have been called into question: in 2019, DeepMind placed Suleyman on leave following accusations that he had bullied his staffers.

Shortly afterward, he departed DeepMind to become Google’s vice president of product management and policy for artificial intelligence.

Suleyman has since apologized for his behavior.

He says he is working with a coach every week and has learned “the importance of giving people lots of space to get on with their work.”

Suleyman says one of his top priorities at Inflection is to create technology that is **kind and compassionate**.

“I definitely feel a heavy responsibility for creating a set of values in my company and hiring people to try to reflect those values,”

he says. “Because those are the people that then go off and create the product, which then affects real people in the world.”

Analysis
I like that technolgy should be kind and compassionate


25) Marc Raibert
Executive Director, Boston Dynamics AI Institute
He believe Robots are dumb, dumb as toasters, dumb as doorknobs
  - tell them what to do, in well-defined environments

Boston Dynamics - doglike robots
  - inspecting factories for safety concerns
  - sentries at military bases
  - investigating suspicious packages

Boston Dynamics AI Institute
  - aiming to give robots not just mobility and function
  - nimbleness and smarts, two things they deeply lack.

**Athletic AI**
Actual Frontier of AI software... the evolution of AI with Robotics
**Real-Time perception** - AI software
Better Hardware (Robotics) - greater mobility, greater dexterity
Messy Garage example...

Human Visual Capability - is just incredible, part of athletic AI

**cognitive AI**
Human Reasoning and Problem Solving
Airport planning example...

Ethics in AI
  - More concerned about Robotics taking Jobs
  - Less concerned about uncontrollable Robots

AI is in its **toddlerhood**, encourage it's growth
We do not regulate toddlers based on what horribles things they might do one day... it does not make any sense

Analysis
I get the feeling that he's being coy with what he's saying. I personally feel that everything he's talking about in getting better robotics exists today. Obviously the integration is going to be some hard work. However, the path to that is very clear. The Real-Time perception is already there. The Cognitive reasoning skills are also there. In fact, I see the full self driving cars as prime examples of this. The only thing that needs to be worked out is the human form factor. I personally assume it'll require some added APIs in simulated Robotics movement and lot and lots of training. I get the feeling the it will be done.

---

INNOVATORS

26) Ted Chiang
Writer

Perhaps the world’s most celebrated living science-fiction author.
His short, carefully hewn stories explore how our inner worlds and our societies would react to unexpected rifts in the fabric of science.
How would it feel to receive a hormone injection that drastically improved your cognitive function?
What if learning an alien language changed the way you perceived time?
And if humanity were to create artificial life, what obligations would we owe it?


Critical of AI and the corporations behind it.
Points out ChatGPT inability to separate truth from fiction - “a blurry jpeg of the web”

In another, he took aim at the structures of power that new AI advances both arose from and reinforce.
Without structural economic changes, he argued, the rise of AI threatens to worsen wealth inequality, weaken worker power, and fortify a tech oligarchy.
“What does progress even mean, if it doesn’t include better lives for people who work?” he wrote.
“What is the point of greater efficiency, if the money being saved isn’t going anywhere except into shareholders’ bank accounts?”

In his short but electric stories, Chiang makes every word count.
And in a video interview over Zoom in early August, language is a preoccupation.
Chiang accepts the need for humanity to use metaphors when talking about new technologies; in our search for meaning, it helps to anchor ourselves in comparisons.
His problem is when the metaphors we use mislead us.
For instance, when a large language model produces false information, it’s referred to as a “hallucination.”
He prefers “confabulation.”
Hallucination implies not only the presence of an inner mind, but the capacity of that mind to have sensory experiences.
Confabulation, on the other hand, happens when a person unknowingly falsifies information to gloss over a gap in their memory.
It’s still a metaphor, but a far better one for how current AI works, he thinks.
“Can we stop LLMs from confabulating while still having them generate factual responses of the sort that we want?” Chiang asks.
“I’m skeptical, because I don’t think that there are fundamentally different processes at work.”

Like many science-fiction authors, Chiang has written in his short stories about artificial beings with conscious inner worlds.
Has this fictional device—so often useful for telling intimate stories about what really makes us human—exacerbated our tendency to see flickers of sentience in AI tools when in reality, no such thing exists?
While lots of science fiction has explored the idea of sentient AI, we have few fictional touchstones for the situation we currently find ourselves in, where machines can bewitch us with our own language even while having no executive function.
Is there a role for science fiction in popularizing that idea?
Chiang is skeptical.
“All art is political, and can promote positive political ideas,” he says. “But I don’t want to say science fiction should have any other priorities beyond being good art.”

Chiang also balks at the suggestion that deflating the unlikely tales spun by technologists gives him “any kind of moral authority.”
But he says that when he reads some of the more speculative AI risk discourse, he does see more in common with science fiction than fact.
“The idea of a computer that can make itself smarter and become super intelligent, that is a really interesting story idea,” he says.
“But to hear people talk about it as if it’s something that is actually going to happen, that’s just jarring.”
